Adding Soroban to Stellar Fundamentals (#269)
stellar/stellar-docs: docs/fundamentals-and-concepts/stellar-data-structures/operations-and-transactions.mdx

## Operations and transactions: how they work

> To perform actions with an account on the Stellar network, you compose operations, bundle them into a transaction, and then sign and submit the transaction to the network. Smart contract transactions (`InvokeHostFunctionOp`, `ExtendFootprintTTLOp`, and `RestoreFootprintOp`) can only have one operation per transaction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To perform actions with an account on the Stellar network, you compose operations, bundle them into a transaction, and then sign and submit the transaction to the network. Smart contract transactions (those with `InvokeHostFunctionOp`, `ExtendFootprintTTLOp`, or `RestoreFootprintOp` operations) can only have one operation per transaction.
```

All operations fall into one of three threshold categories: low, medium, or high, and each threshold category has a weight between 0 and 255 (which can be determined using set_options). Thresholds determine what signature weight is required for the operation to be accepted. For example, let’s say an account sets the medium threshold weight to 5. If the account wants to successfully establish a trustline with the `changeTrust` operation, the weight of the signature(s) must be greater than or equal to 5.

To learn more about signature weight, see the [Signature and Multisignature Encyclopedia Entry](../../encyclopedia/signatures-multisig).

View a comprehensive list of Stellar operations and their threshold levels in the [List of Operations section](../list-of-operations).

### Transactions

The Stellar network encodes transactions using a standardized protocol called External Data Representation (XDR). You can read more about this in our [XDR Encyclopedia Entry](../../encyclopedia/xdr).

Accounts can only perform one transaction at a time.

> Transactions comprise a bundle of between 1-100 operations (except smart contract transactions, which can only have one operation per transaction) and are signed and submitted to the ledger by accounts. Transactions always need to be authorized by the source account’s public key to be valid, which involves signing the transaction object with the public key’s associated secret key. A transaction plus its signature(s) is called a transaction envelope.

Reviewer 2: nit: add a cross ref?

A transaction may need more than one signature- this happens if it has operations that affect more than one account or if it has a high threshold weight. Check out the [Signature and Multisignature Encyclopedia Entry](../../encyclopedia/signatures-multisig) for more information.

Transactions are atomic. Meaning if one operation in a transaction fails, all operations fail, and the entire transaction is not applied to the ledger.

Operations are executed for the source account of the transaction unless an operation override is defined.

> Smart contract transactions also go through a simulation process where developers can test how the transaction would be executed on the network using the RPC endpoint `simulateTransaction`. Read more in the [Soroban docs](https://soroban.stellar.org/api/methods/simulateTransaction).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Smart contract transactions also go through a simulation process where developers can test how the transaction would be executed on the network using the RPC endpoint `simulateTransaction`. Read more in the [Soroban docs](https://soroban.stellar.org/docs/fundamentals-and-concepts/interacting-with-contracts#transaction-simulation).
```

Maybe this would be a better link for the transaction simulation stuff? Not sure

### 8. Transaction apply order is determined (Validator Network)

Once SCP agrees on a particular transaction set, the apply order is computed for the transaction set. This shuffles the set's order to create uncertainty for competing transactions and maintains the order of sequence numbers for multiple transactions per account.

### 9. Fees are collected (Validator)

Fees are collected for all transactions simultaneously.

### 10. Application (Validator)

Each transaction is applied in the previously-determined order. For each transaction, the account’s sequence number is consumed (increased by 1), the transaction’s validity is rechecked, and each operation is applied in the order they occur in the transaction. Operations may fail at this stage due to errors that can occur outside of the transaction and operation validity checks. For example, an insufficient balance for a payment is not checked at submission and would fail at this time. The entire transaction will fail if any operation fails, and all previous operations will be rolled back.

> ### 11. Protocol Upgrades (Validator)

Reviewer 2: ~~I hope all of this deleted stuff isn't going away forever?? It was super useful to have. Maybe in a encyclopedia entry?~~

Reviewer 2: jk I see it later in the diff heh

Author: Yeah, pulled out the transaction lifecycle into its own section b/c we wanted to highlight it more. Will also add smart contract information in this section.
